Rule: Text spacing via CSS is above minimum value or not set to `!important` (24afc2, 78fd32, 9e45ec) (#1412)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/line-height-not-important-78fd32.md

---
id: 78fd32
name: Line height in `style` attributes is not `!important`
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that the line height styles can be adjusted by user, i.e. that `!important` is not applied to the style, unless the style has already exceeded the specified metric for retaining content visibility and functionality.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.12: # Text Spacing (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Jey Nandakumar
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any HTML element that is [visible][], for which the `style` attribute [declares][declared][][line-height][] CSS property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule applies to any HTML element that is [visible][], for which the `style` attribute [declares][declared] the [line-height][] CSS property.
```

## Expectation 1

For the test target's [line-height][] property, one of the following is true:

- the [declared][] value specified via the `style` attribute does not have the [important flag][]; or
- the [computed][] value is at least `1.5` times its [computed][] [font-size][].

## Assumptions

> If there is a mechanism available on the page by which line height can be adjusted, failing this rule might not mean [success criterion 1.4.12 Text spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#text-spacing) is not satisfied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no mechanism available on the page to adjust line height. If there is such a mechanism, failing this rule might not mean [success criterion 1.4.12 Text spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#text-spacing) is not satisfied.
```
The assumption is the first sentence. The "If" sentence is a fact that is always true, not an assumption.

## Accessibility Support

While some assistive technologies are able to set [user origin][] styles, others, such as browser extensions, are only able to set style with the [author origin][]. Such assistive technologies can not create styles with a high enough [priority][] to override a `style` attribute with the [important flag][]. If accessibility support does not include assistive technologies that override line height through [author origin][], this rule should not be used.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This `p` element has a `line-height` of `32px` (equals `2em` ) which is above the recommended metric, given the specified font size is `1em`.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			font-size: 1em;
		}
	</style>

	<body>

> 		<p style="line-height: 2em; !important">

Reviewer 2: Should this example not be 1.5em and equal to the recommended metric? Otherwise how does it differ from passed example 2 other than the unit used.

</html>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This `p` element has a `line-height` of `10px !important` (equals `0.625em` ) which is below the recommended minimum, given the specified font size of the body is 16 pixels.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			font-size: 16px;
		}
	</style>

	<body>
		<p style="line-height: 30px !important">
			The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
		</p>
	</body>
</html>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

This `p` element is not [visible][] because of `display: none`.

```html
<p style="display: none">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This text is not [visible][] because it is positioned off screen.

```html
<p style="position: absolute; top: -999em">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This `body` element does not have a `style` attribute specified.

```html
<html>
	<style>
		body {
			line-height: 50px;
		}
	</style>

	<body>
		The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
	</body>
</html>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

> This `p` element has a [line-height][] of `24px` specified via the style attribute, but does not have the [important flag][].

Reviewer: No `!important` is now Passing, not Inapplicable.

Reviewer 2: Agree again. With similar thoughts on including a passed example with too small a line-height and no !important flag, and using fixed units in the examples.

## Assumptions

There is no mechanism available on the page to adjust [line-height][]. If there is such a mechanism, failing this rule might not mean [success criterion 1.4.12 Text spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#text-spacing) is not satisfied.

## Accessibility Support

While some assistive technologies are able to set [user origin][] styles, others, such as browser extensions, are only able to set style with the [author origin][]. Such assistive technologies can not create styles with a high enough [priority][] to override a `style` attribute with the [important flag][]. If accessibility support does not include assistive technologies that override [line-height][] through [author origin][], this rule should not be used.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This `p` element has a `line-height` of `32px` (equals `2em` ) which is above the recommended metric, given the specified font size is `1em`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This `p` element has a `line-height` of `2em` which is above the recommended metric, given the specified font size is `1em`.
```

CSS specifications define each declaration as being either [important][] (if is as the `!important` annotation) or [normal][]. Given that `normal` is also a keyword for this property, and that `!important` is wider known that this distinction, this rule rather uses "[important][]"/"not [important][]" to avoid confusion.

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

> 
> Some examples use a fixed font size to demonstrate specific aspects of the rule (notably in order to provide a [computed][] value for the property). Some Passed Examples set the `line-height` property below the minimum, but do so in a way that can be overridden by styles with [author origin][]. These are however not very good practices and should be avoided.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

---
id: 78fd32
name: Line height in `style` attributes is not `!important`
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that the `style` attribute is not used to prevent adjusting `line-height` by using `!important`, except if it's at least 1.5 times the font size.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.12: # Text Spacing (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Jean-Yves Moyen
    - Jey Nandakumar
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any HTML element that is [visible][] and for which the `style` attribute [declares][declared] the [line-height][] CSS property.

## Expectation

For each test target, one of the following is true:

> - **above minimum**: the [computed][] value of its [line-height][] property is not `normal`, and is at least `1.5` or 1.5 times the [computed][] value of its [font-size][] property; or
> - **not important**: the [computed][] value of its [line-height][] property is not [important][]; or

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **not important**: the [computed][] value of its [line-height][] property is not [important][]; or
- **above minimum**: the [computed][] value of its [line-height][] property is not `normal`, and is at least `1.5` or 1.5 times the [computed][] value of its [font-size][] property; or
```

CSS specifications define each declaration as being either [important][] (if is as the `!important` annotation) or [normal][]. Given that `normal` is also a keyword for this property, and that `!important` is wider known that this distinction, this rule rather uses "[important][]"/"not [important][]" to limit confusion.

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.12: Text Spacing](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/text-spacing.html)
- [CSS Text Module Level 3 - Spacing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-text-3/#spacing)
- [CSS Visual formatting model details](https://drafts.csswg.org/css2/visudet.html)

Some examples use a fixed font size to demonstrate specific aspects of the rule (notably in order to provide a [computed][] value for the property). This is in general not a very good practice and should be avoided.

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of `32px` (assuming a default `medium` font size of `16px`) which is above the recommended minimum, thus it matches the **above minimum** condition.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of 2 times the font size which is above the recommended minimum, thus it matches the **above minimum** condition.
```

```html
<p style="line-height: 2em !important">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 2

> This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of `30px` specified via the style attribute, which is equal to the recommended minimum given the specified font size is 20 pixels, thus it matches the **above minimum** condition.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of `30px` specified via the style attribute, which is equal to the recommended minimum given the specified font size is 20 pixels.
```

```html
<style>
	p {
		font-size: 20px;
	}
</style>

<p style="line-height: 30px !important">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of `25.6px` (160% of `16px`) which is above the recommended minimum, thus it matches the **above minimum** condition.

```html
<style>
	p {
		font-size: 16px;
	}
</style>

<p style="line-height: 160% !important">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 4

This `p` element has a [computed][] `line-height` of `1.6` which is above the recommended minimum, thus it matches the **above minimum** condition.

```html
<p style="line-height: 1.6 !important">
	The toy brought back fond memories of being lost in the rain forest.
</p>
```

> #### Passed Example 5

Reviewer 4: As above, don't think we need this one.

#### Failed Example 1

> This `p` element has a `line-height` of `10px !important` (equals `0.625em` ) which is below the recommended minimum, given the specified font size of the body is `1em`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This `p` element has a `line-height` of `1.875em !important` which is below the recommended minimum, given the specified font size of the body is `1em`.
```
Which is actually above the minimum of 1.5em 🙃
